Environment Setup

This project uses a Python virtual environment (venv) to keep dependencies isolated and reproducible.

Prerequisites

Make sure the following are installed on your system:

Python 3.10 or 3.11

pip

Visual Studio Code

VS Code Python extension

VS Code Jupyter extension

Note: Python 3.10 or 3.11 is recommended for better compatibility with scientific and quantum computing libraries.

1. Create a virtual environment

Open a terminal in the project root directory and run:

Windows

python -m venv .venv

If you have multiple Python versions installed:

py -3.11 -m venv .venv

Linux / macOS

python3 -m venv .venv

2. Activate the virtual environment
Windows PowerShell

..venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

Windows Command Prompt

.venv\Scripts\activate.bat

Linux / macOS

source .venv/bin/activate

After activation, your terminal should show (.venv) at the beginning of the line.

3. Upgrade pip

python -m pip install --upgrade pip

4. Install project dependencies

Install all required packages from requirements.txt:

pip install -r requirements.txt

This will install all dependencies needed for the project in a single step.

5. Register the environment as a Jupyter kernel

To use this environment inside Jupyter notebooks, run:

python -m ipykernel install --user --name=qsvm-phishing-venv --display-name "Python (.venv) - QSVM Phishing"

6. Select the interpreter in VS Code

In VS Code:

Open the project folder

Press Ctrl + Shift + P

Search for Python: Select Interpreter

Choose the interpreter inside .venv

Typical paths are:

Windows: .venv\Scripts\python.exe

Linux/macOS: .venv/bin/python

7. Select the notebook kernel

When opening a notebook, choose:

Python (.venv) - QSVM Phishing

This ensures that all notebooks run with the correct environment and installed dependencies.

8. Verify the installation

You can test whether the environment is working correctly with:

import sys
print(sys.executable)

The output should point to the Python executable inside the .venv folder.

You can also test a few core packages:

import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import sklearn

print("NumPy:", np.version)
print("Pandas:", pd.version)
print("Scikit-learn:", sklearn.version)

9. Deactivate the environment

When you are done working, you can deactivate the virtual environment with:

deactivate

Optional: PowerShell execution policy issue

If PowerShell blocks script execution on Windows, run:

Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope CurrentUser RemoteSigned

Then activate the environment again:

..venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1